Donna's gonna walk up to the bar and
stand in her comfortable stance with her
shins about an inch away from that
barbell objectively we're looking at the
barbell in line with her mid foot and we
are hoping to keep it exactly over her
mid foot which is her center of mass
throughout the entire movement Dean's
gonna bend over and grab the bar on the
outside of her legs giving herself
enough room to very slightly push her
knees outwards against the inside of her
locked elbows sitting down into position
so she can activate some leg drive bum
down knees out against the inside of her
lock two elbows crown of her head
reaching up to the ceiling
pulling her shoulders down towards her
back pockets to activate her lats and
focuses on pushing the world away bum
down knees out shoulder blades down head
to ceiling push the world away knees
locked out hips push through one more
rep bum down knees out shoulder blades
down head to ceiling push the world away
and relax okay the cue of pushing the
world away rather than pull the bar up
is what I prefer to use they don't know
if the deadlift is a push or a pull it's
a perfect combination of both do you
guys are getting smarter okay it's a
funny thing but I follow a lot of silly
forums and stupid arguments online where
they talk about mmm it's a push mmm no
it's not it's a pull okay it's a perfect
combination of both it is possible to
make the deadlift a pure pull you lock
your knees you bend over you pick that
bar up and we actually have the
potential to pick up a lot of weight
that way okay but you are missing out on
a large part of the picture which is leg
drive to get leg drive the knees must be
bent some people misinterpret that and
they try and make it a pure push
movement and they squat too deep into
the movement okay this is inefficient
how deep should you squat then on
as deep as you can not quite keeping the
shins vertical there can be slight
forward knee progression without the bar
being pushed away from your center of
mass which is why in a conventional
deadlift I like to start with the bar an
inch away okay which on most people an
inch okay it could be a little bit more
a little bit less than an inch but what
we're looking at is the barbell over the
mid-foot okay next we're going to swap
between conventional and sumo with the
sumo deadlift she's going to stand in
her comfortable stance everyone is
different that depends on hip structure
not more so hip structure than a bone
length and size as you can see by Dianna
she is very petite okay but her stance
is quite wide okay
with the sumo deadlift I do prefer to
start with the shins on the bar not an
inch away reason being when she sits
into position and bends the knees the
tibia or the shin bone goes outwards it
doesn't pass forwards and therefore
doesn't push the barbell away from your
center of mass which also allows her to
bend her knees a little bit more in a
sumo deadlift than in a conventional
opening her hips to grab that bar
pushing her knees outwards this is the
lift where we can remain vertical with
our tibia or we can keep our shin bone
perpendicular to the ground completely
upright and not push the barbell forward
opening the hips arms straight down
which is the most efficient position for
the arms to be same Q's knees out
shoulder blades down head to ceiling
push the world away knees locked out
hips pushed through bum down knees out
shoulder blades down crown of the head
to the ceiling push the world away
one more rep bum down knees out
shoulders down head to the ceiling push
it all the way knees locked out hips
pushed through and that is a sumo
deadlift there's a few landmarks that we
can look for to determine someone's
ideal stance in a sumo deadlift okay the
most efficient position is one where the
knees
directly above the foot and the tibia is
perpendicular to the ground okay me
directly above the foot if the stance is
too wide for that the knee isn't
directly above the foot so when we talk
physics we talk straight lines okay the
line of force isn't going straight down
into the ground therefore can be seen as
inefficient okay that's physics no
physics talks straight lines okay but
this isn't purely physics some people
prefer the advantage of having a lesser
range of motion and can afford to stand
with a slightly wider stance and shift a
heavier load actually that's how Dinny
has lifted some very heavy weights in
the past with the stance that is wider
than knees straight over toe knees
straight over foot okay the biggest
determining factor is your mobility okay
if you lack the mobility to stand with
that wide stance don't stand too wide
because you saw Denny do it don't stand
too wide because you feel it's going to
reduce your range of motion okay wider
isn't necessarily better better is
better okay and it's dependent on your
hip structure good start point that I
look at is the lines on the bar and
that's generally if I've never seen you
lift before I'll say just look at those
lines on the bar I'll only ever start
you with the light weight so it doesn't
matter if you're slightly off it's not
going to injure you it's the trial and
error game okay but that's roughly
pretty close for most most lifters if
it's too wide
make the adjustment if it's too close
may make the adjustment okay let's go
back to conventional then he walks up to
the bar and stands in her comfortable
stance don't bend down you comfortable
stance think of jump stance think of a
basketball or jumping to slam dunk
okay how close is their stance when they
do that okay it's actually quite close
okay spoiler alert a lot of people stand
with a very wide stance thinking it's
going to give them the the widest base
of support the most stability
okay it's not the case with deadlifts
one of the biggest reasons why I like to
use this close stance
aside from it's one of the most powerful
stances is considering the appropriate
grip width can you not tell me what the
best grip width is for their lifts and
why straight down why less range of
motion is then unheard of a snatch grip
deadlift can you bend down into a snatch
grip the lift okay so that's
exaggerating this analogy we're going
quite wide with her grip look how deep
she has to sit now keep your butt down
and go into a conventional deadlift grip
okay notice she's able to adjust her
position and stand a lot further away
from that barbell because we're in a
much more efficient position stand up
and just rescue back a little bit okay
the most efficient position where the
least distance can be traveled is where
the arms are straight down now some
people if you notice Vinny's proportions
she has very feminine proportions which
is narrower shoulders and wider hip
structure compared to me I'm standing
behind her for a reason my shoulders are
a lot broader than hers but my hips are
very similar
perdón is okay so because of this her
hip structure takes priority over her
grip width so for a lot of females that
have narrower shoulders than their hip
structure if they try and grab the bar
with the arms straight down just because
Beth said it's the most efficient
position they're blocking off their leg
drive they're putting their legs in a
less efficient position legs stance hips
take priority over grip width but we
still must consider that the list that
distance least traveled is where the
arms are straight down
okay so Denny considers this and she's
standing in a comfortable stance
considering that if she has her arms on
the outside of that she does want to
travel so far so she wants them to fall
within that grip width okay standing in
her comfortable stance with the shins
one inch away when I view the barbell
from the side this collar is directly in
line with her mid foot that is her
center-of-mass bending down to grab the
bar grabbing it on the outside of her
legs bearing in mind the most efficient
position is where her arms are straight
down she also needs to be able to give
her knees enough room to push very
slightly outwards don't exaggerate that
her stance is very much
straight ahead slightly outwards is also
quite fine okay knees are pointing in
the same direction as her toes sitting
into position putting a bum down so she
can include leg drive pushing her knees
very slightly outwards pulls her scapula
down towards her back pockets not
backing down
just down crown of her head towards the
ceiling takes the big breaths and holds
it pushes the world away knees locked
out hips push through to my ribs bum
down knees out shoulder blades down head
to ceiling push the world away run down
these out shoulders down head to ceiling
push the world away and relax sumo
deadlift walking out to the bar in her
comfortable stance with her shins on the
bar why can I afford to have her shins
on the bar and a sumo deadlift but not
on the bar in a conventional deadlift
because the knees are going outwards in
a sumo deadlift and it's not going to
push the barbell forwards away from her
center of mass I want to keep that
barbell yep it's it's spread evenly her
amongst her foot her whole foot but now
she has less balance because instead of
having her feet straight ahead
she's roughly on a 45 degree angle if
it's 46 or 44 it's okay okay but now
we've got less distance from her heel to
her toe okay so we've got slightly less
balance so something that a lot of new
sumo deadlift is find is they're a
little bit off balance okay and that's
and that's because that reason
technically yes the knees point in the
same direction as the toes okay some
people are quite comfortable with the
straighter stance straighter toe angle
okay a mistake that people make is
pointing them out too much you point
them out too much because that is right
though
good the knees must point in the same
direction even someone with mobility is
great as Dinny
can't achieve that okay and there is no
doubt she fell over straight away
okay so 45 degrees is is the rule there
are always exceptions to the rule okay
did you do that yet no okay standing in
her comfortable stance toes roughly 45
degrees bending over to grab the bar by
opening her hips pushing the knees out
in the same direction as her toes
grabbing the bar with her arms straight
down which is the most efficient
position sitting into position deep
enough so she can get enough leg drive
but also not so deep that she loses her
posterior chain component of the lift
shoulder blades down depressing the
scapula
so elbows down towards the back pocket
to activate the lats pushing the world
away sitting into position opening the
hips pushing the knees out scaps
down the pressure of the scapula head to
ceiling push the world away knees like
the out hips push through it and relax
taking the slack out of the bar okay
does everyone know does anyone not know
what that means
okay I'm gonna demonstrate because I
don't want you to this form so so
grip grip and rip okay my elbows are
soft and from this position I'll try and
build momentum and bang it off the
ground can you hear that noise when I
bangs off the ground okay
versus taking the slack out of the bar
arms long you can hear that click I've
taken it out now okay slack out of the
bar listen you don't hear it okay so
that's a little trick to help you it's
audible we can hear that we're taking
the slack out of the bar the lifter can
hear it and the coach can hear it as
well okay but some people are still able
to not take the bar just like ours about
properly and take the noise out of the
bar so that's not just it okay arms long
head to ceiling
head to ceiling is a relatively new cue
that I use and I learnt it off a very
good friend of mine who's a martial
artist I don't really like the martial
arts it's Wing Chun
you know I like more aggressive martial
arts but Wing Chun he loves it he's a
very peaceful guy and they talk a lot
about things that I love to talk about
one of them is posture and something
that he said that resonated very well
with me is to not think about posture is
back and forward think about it as
up-down okay
back and forward is a big mistake that I
see when people that have the classic
upper cross syndrome in turn of the
rotated shoulders protracted scapula
forward head excessively thoracic
excessively chaotic thoracic spine
that's up across syndrome and how would
people correct that shoulders back okay
so now they're creating a whole new
postural deviation with too much tension
in their upper trapezius and now they're
literally giving themselves a headache
and they haven't fixed their posture
they've just gone from one ship posture
to another instead of thinking back
forward when you're correcting your
posture think up down crown of your head
everyone do that now Kranti head to
ceiling elongate your spine look at your
postures okay what did that do to our
thoracic spine come here please Denis
this is the thoracic spine t 1 to t 12
ok what did that do to your thoracic
spine head to ceiling it extended your
thoracic spine what else is paired with
the extension of the thoracic spine
retraction depression of the scapula
okay so instead of telling you to pull
your shoulder blades back and down if I
tell you to elongate your spine head to
ceiling okay that's extending the
thoracic spine it's retracting and
depressing the scapula
it doesn't need to sit fully retracted
in the press that's not good posture
which is why when you walk around to
correct your forward head posture that's
not making it better okay that's good
posture
okay everyone think about that when
you're sitting down and slouching over
your chair your ass all oil back head to
ceiling okay in a deadlift it takes our
body as far away as possible from that
barbell reducing the range of motion
that we need to travel okay when you are
not taking the slack out of the bar a
big error that people make is getting
their bodies down here I have to travel
so much further and by the time it does
engage
it'll take me out of position okay
taking the slack out of the bar reduces
the range of motion it also allows the
lifter to be able to feel where the
weight is distributed over their feet 70
kilos walk up to the bar did you do
conventional yet let's do conventional
walk up to the bar with the shins about
an inch away when I say about an inch
okay
that's what I mean a lot of people will
be different but what we are objectively
looking for is the bar traveling over
the mid-foot and staying there
throughout the entire movement a big
area that a lot of people make is
pushing the bar away from their body
okay something that we use to stop that
is lats and a cue that we use to
activate the lats is to depress the
scapula you don't have to talk like that
to your general population client pull
your armpits towards your pelvis or pull
your shoulder blades to your back
pockets okay another action of the lats
is what extension at the shoulder joint
is an action of the lats do we extend
our shoulder joint in a deadlift
kinda you just don't see it because the
bars trapped in our body okay but
whereas we are also actively pulling the
bar towards our body okay this is lats
when you see someone dead lifting in the
bar drifts away from their body they're
out there lats aren't on okay we talked
about the role in the exception to the
rule there is no exception to that the
bar drifts away from the body you're
doing it wrong
you need to have lats on okay so we know
a reason for lats is to keep the bar
close to the body do we agree that's
more efficient why the lift what's
another reason why I want my lats in a
deadlift
there's always tension but tension just
is one of those words that's like I
don't know what the answer is so I'm
just going to say tension because we
need to be tight protection of the spine
what do we know about the lats okay so
the lat attaches to the inner lip of the
bicipital groove which is at the front
of the humerus so right here that's
where the lats attached and they come on
the inside and it attaches to our pelvis
through our thoracolumbar fascia okay so
that's fashion that the lab attaches to
and then that attaches to the pelvis
okay the lat
covers the longest distance of our spine
of all ten of our core muscles if your
lats aren't on you're not protecting
your spine to its potential okay
so keeping the bar close to the midline
and protecting our spine is why I want
your lats on when we talk about neutral
spine I haven't said that word yet
that's the first time I've said it today
I don't usually use it it's like tuck
the elbows I don't usually use it until
I need to okay all of these lifters that
I coach with the cue of retraction
depression of the scapula armpits the
pelvis pull your scabs out of your back
pockets that's three ways of saying the
same thing when I use that cue it puts
the spine in the perfect position okay
all of the cues that I've used yes I
want neutral spine but I don't always
need to say it does that make sense did
you do a conventional deadlift no walk
up to the bar with the shins about an
inch away from the bar we are looking
for the bar to be we're in line with her
mid foot stance is where said again jump
stance great is that close so wide close
okay what if she had really thick thighs
and a huge hip structure it's going to
be a little bit wider so who are the
athletes that we see that stand with the
wide stance
strong men okay in particular the ones
that we see are the ones that are
televised and the only ones that are
televised are the guys that weigh 100
sixty seventy eighty and the only really
ones we pay attention to is for Eddie
Brian okay those guys are 190 kilograms
and plus okay the amount of times I've
had lift has come to my gym and stand
the way Thor stands and I say why are
you standing that way and they say
because Thor stands with that stance
you're not Thor you're not six foot nine
you're not 200 kilograms okay that's a
big reason as to why he stands with the
wide stance like that okay
she's an inch away from the bar bending
over grabbing the bound the outside of
her knees giving her knees just enough
room to very slightly push outwards
against the inside of her locked elbows
bum down knees out escapes down to her
back pockets or armpits to pelvis to get
the last one and pushes the world away
head to ceiling throughout the entire
movement which lengthens her spine also
takes the slack out of the bar knees
locked out hips push through and relax
any questions the observations
sumo deadlift how good you are there
sumo deadlift she's standing in her
comfortable stance shins on the bar
because when she bends down the knees
are gonna go outwards the tibia is not
gonna push the barbell forwards away
from her center of mass grabbing the bar
now she doesn't have knees interfering
with her arm position she can put her
arms exactly straight down open the hips
to grab the bar bum down knees out
armpits the pelvis crown of a head to
the ceiling push the world away knees
locked out it's pushed through to
complete the movement she's standing
straight she's not leaned back too far
knees locked out his push through and
relax